18 June 2026
Audits IFC models for Geolocation, duplicate elements, out of bounds objects
Make sure you have Python 3 installed:
	winget install Python.Python.3
		py --version
			Python 3.14.6
Add Python to Windows Path
	Search for "Edit the system environment variables"
	System Properties > Environment Variables > System Variables > "Path"
	Add the path to your Pyhton installation: C:\Users\YourName\AppData\Local\Programs\Python\Python314(folder)
Instructions
	1. Both the Python ifc_audit.py and the IFC models must be in the same folder
	2. Open Windows Powershell
	3. Change the current directory to the abovementioned folder cd "your_folder"
	4. Command "python ifc_audit.py"

--------------------------------------------------------------------------
v2 - 5 September 2026
--------------------------------------------------------------------------
What changed
	Duplicate detection now uses real element geometry instead of the
	ObjectPlacement origin. Revit exports beams and columns with the
	placement sitting at the storey origin and the true position buried in
	the geometry, so v1 reported every beam on a level as a duplicate
	(440 of 637 elements in the structural model - all false).

	Geolocation now reports real-world map coordinates and compares the
	IfcMapConversion of every model in the package. That is what decides
	whether a federated set lines up.

	Length units are read from the IfcProject and applied everywhere.
	Millimetre, metre, foot and inch models all work; nothing assumes mm.

	The floating-element check was rebuilt on a robust statistic and now
	actually fires. v1 could not see a stray element 890 m from the model.

	The report leads with a verdict instead of making you read it all.

How a duplicate is decided
	1. Duplicate GlobalId          -> ERROR, the file is schema-invalid
	2. Same IFC class AND same type/family name AND bounding boxes
	   overlapping by 90% or more  -> DUPLICATE
	3. Same class and type name, roughly coincident but different extent,
	   or geometry that could not be resolved -> PROBABLE
	4. Overlapping but a DIFFERENT class or type name -> NOT a duplicate.
	   Reported separately as an INTERFERENCE with --clash.

	Overlap on its own is never treated as a duplicate.

	Pairs that repeat with a constant element-id offset are reported as ONE
	duplicated block rather than N separate findings - that pattern means a
	group was copied in a single action.

How a floating element is decided
	Each element's distance from the model centre is measured, in plan and
	in elevation. Anything past median + 8 x MAD of those distances is
	flagged. MAD (median absolute deviation) tolerates up to half the model
	being stray, so a cluster of strays cannot stretch the limit until it
	hides itself - which is how the v1 percentile envelope failed.

	The limits used are printed above the results every run. If you already
	know the model, give an absolute distance with --float-xy / --float-z.

How georeferencing is judged
	Each model's IfcMapConversion is classed as one of three things:

	  populated    Eastings/Northings/Height are filled in - a real
	               georeference.
	  placeholder  all zeros. The exporter wrote the entity but never
	               filled it in. This is an identity transform, NOT a
	               georeference, and models agreeing on those zeros are
	               not thereby proven aligned. Reported two ways depending
	               on whether the model geometry already carries real-world
	               coordinates, because the fix differs.
	  absent       no IfcMapConversion at all.

	Only populated ones are compared against each other, so a placeholder's
	zeros cannot drag the Eastings spread to a nonsense value.

	Level of georeferencing (LoGeoRef) is reported per model:

	  10  postal address only
	  20  IfcSite latitude / longitude
	  30  IfcSite placement carries the survey offset
	  40  model context WorldCoordinateSystem / TrueNorth
	  50  IfcMapConversion + IfcProjectedCRS   <- the only complete one

	Below level 50 the report prints a HOW TO FIX block aimed at the model
	author, explaining why naming a CRS is not georeferencing and giving the
	Revit steps to correct it. The same text goes on the Georeferencing tab
	of the Excel workbook so it can be issued with the findings.

	The report also compares the REAL anchor - where each model's own origin
	lands in map coordinates - rather than only the IfcMapConversion values.
	When the offset is carried by the IfcSite placement, comparing
	MapConversion alone sees ten identical rows of zeros and reports a false
	pass; comparing anchors catches a model sitting metres from the rest.

	Scale is checked per model, not across models. IfcMapConversion.Scale
	converts project units into CRS map units, so a millimetre model on a
	metre CRS must carry 0.001 and a metre model 1.0. Both are correct, and
	comparing them to each other would report a false mismatch on any
	package that mixes units. Each model is checked against the value its
	own units imply.

Reading the report
	The report answers the question first, then shows the working:

	  RESULT     one line per check, worst first
	               [!]   must fix
	               [?]   review
	               [ok]  passed
	  MODELS     the full file names, each given a short label
	  ...        the detail sections, keyed by those labels

	Models are labelled by the part of the file name that differs - for
	ISO 19650 names that lands on the discipline code (AR, ST, PI...), and
	repeats are numbered (PI1, PI2). Full names appear once, in MODELS, so
	the rest of the report is not 40 characters of shared prefix per line.

	A condition shared by several models is stated once, naming the models,
	instead of repeated per model.

	Interferences are grouped by the pair of classes involved, so a few
	hundred pipe-and-fitting overlaps read as a few lines.

	Output is plain ASCII, so "python ifc_audit.py > report.txt" is safe.

Sharing the results
	  python ifc_audit.py --excel audit.xlsx

	writes a real Excel workbook you can issue to the design team. No add-in
	and no pip install - it is built with Python's own zip library. Every
	sheet has a frozen header row and AutoFilter switched on.

	  Summary                Result block: FIX / REVIEW / PASS per check,
	                         colour coded, with the package name and run date
	  Models                 one row per model - schema, units, element and
	                         geometry counts, CRS, centres, MapConversion
	  Georeferencing         LoGeoRef level, anchor coordinates, the offset
	                         of each model from the package median, and the
	                         HOW TO FIX text
	  Duplicates             one row per finding, including reused GlobalIds
	                         and duplicated blocks
	  Interferences by type  overlap counts per pair of IFC classes
	  Interference pairs     every overlapping pair, for filtering
	  Floating               every element flagged as out of place

	Sheets with nothing to report are left out. Add --clash to include the
	two interference sheets.

Options (all optional - "python ifc_audit.py" alone still works)
	--excel audit.xlsx     write the shareable Excel workbook
	--json report.json     also write every finding to a JSON file
	--clash                add the interference report (off by default)
	--clash-frac 0.30      overlap share of the smaller element to report
	--dup-iou 0.90         box overlap at or above which a pair is DUPLICATE
	--probable-iou 0.50    box overlap at or above which a pair is PROBABLE
	--dup-tol 10           coincidence tolerance in millimetres
	--geo-tol 1            MapConversion agreement tolerance in millimetres
	--min-geometry 0.90    flag a model resolving less geometry than this
	--float-k 8            floating sensitivity; lower is stricter
	--float-min 10         floor for the derived float limits, metres
	--float-xy M           override the plan float limit with M metres
	--float-z M            override the vertical float limit with M metres
	--max-rows 20          rows printed per section per model

	Note: in v1, --float-xy was a multiplier and --float-z was a threshold
	that was combined with one. Both are now plain absolute overrides in
	metres, and both are off unless you pass them.

Notes
	Model names print in full; every column widens to the longest name.

	INTERFERENCES is a bounding-box smell test, not clash detection. On MEP
	models it reports pipes overlapping their own fittings at connections.

	ifc_audit_v1_backup.py is the previous version, kept for comparison.
